First Page content:

Samya

Right To Healthcare

There is nothing new or special about the right to life and security of the
person, the right to freedom from discrimination. These and other rights are
universal … enshrined in international law but denied to many of our fellow
human beings simply because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.

— United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, 2012

1st quote: The right of everyone to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health,” not just the right of heterosexual males and females.

2nd quote: Thanks for Marriage, But we need healthcare.

3rd quote: Health care is a right, not a Privilege.

Button: Description/ Introduction/prolegomenon/ Commence/ Started

Second-Page Content:


Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health
“international human rights law affirms that all persons, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity, 
are entitled to the full enjoyment of all human rights, [and] that the application of existing human rights entitlements should take account of the specific situations and experiences of people of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities.”
-Yogyakarta Principles
 
Every human being has the Right to Health but there are people who are deprived of this Right. 
LGBTQ community is one of them.
There are a plethora of issues that affect the health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
and intersex (LGBTI) persons, many of which are issues relating to human rights. Around the world 
and in all societies, LGBTI persons face discrimination and marginalization which puts 
them at risk of not being able to attain the highest attainable standard of health. 
Most societies are structured around two binary genders, male and female, and only one ‘normal’ 
sexual orientation, heterosexual. Medical practitioners, health care workers, policy-makers, 
and educators often fail to talk about, or even consider, those who fall outside of this norm. 
LGBTI persons are those who are not heterosexual (sexual orientation) or those whose identity is not 
gender-conforming by societal norms (gender identity). LGBTI refers to gay, lesbian, or bisexual 
persons (sexual orientation) and transgender or intersex persons (gender identity). 
When the issues of sexual orientation or gender identity are considered, 
often little or no thought is given to how the right to health of these individuals could be better protected.
This invisibility, and associated isolation and marginalization, can have tragic consequences for the health 
and wellbeing of many members of LGBTI communities. They have been subjected to direct violations, 
whereby their physical or mental health is compromised because of their actual or perceived sexual orientation 
or gender identity. Lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transgender, and intersex persons have been attacked, arrested, 
tortured, killed, sentenced to death, committed to medical or psychiatric institutions, and treated with 
‘aversion therapy’ including electroshock therapy or forced rape. Intersex individuals, especially those 
with visibly atypical anatomy, have been subjected to surgery against their will, for example, to ‘correct’ 
their ‘ambiguous genitalia. LGBTI persons are also indirectly victimized through failures to recognize and 
consider this diverse group as healthcare recipients with specific needs resulting in a denial of access to 
the full enjoyment of their right to the highest attainable standard of health. LGBTI persons experience 
frequent human rights violations based solely upon their LGBTI status, which has a major impact on the health 
of LGBTI persons. This situation is an unacceptable affront to human dignity, particularly given the startling 
statistics that have been well known for many years: LGBTI people, especially LGBTI youth, are highly 
susceptible to poor health and health risks. Suicide attempts amongst LGBTI youth, in general, 
are reportedly 3-7 times higher than for heterosexual youth. For these young people, family or social pressure 
to conform to the heterosexual norm makes them highly susceptible to mental health problems and places 
their personal safety at risk. The rate of suicide and suicide attempts amongst LGBTI adults is also higher 
than in the heterosexual community. Studies have also shown that ‘sexual minorities have a higher rate of 
other mental health problems including depression, bipolar disorder, panic attacks, as well as substance 
abuse including tobacco, alcohol and drug addictions and other ‘unhealthy behaviors’ such as high-risk/unsafe 
sex, and higher infection rates for HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases. For example, it has been 
shown lesbian woman are more likely to smoke, abuse alcohol, weigh more, and suffer stress, than heterosexual 
women, placing them in a higher risk category for heart disease, stroke, cervical and other forms of cancer. 
Also, lesbians usually have fewer pregnancies and live births than their heterosexual counterparts which 
results in greater hormone exposure and increases their risk of breast, uterine and ovarian cancer.
YOGYAKARTA PRINCIPLES: 
The Yogyakarta Principles were signed by 29 international human rights experts, after a draft process and 
workshop organized by the International Commission of Jurists and the International Service for Human Rights. Principles 17 and 18 address the Right to the Highest attainable standard of health and protection from medical abuses. 
Principle 17 of the Yogyakarta Principles states: 
“Everyone has the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. Sexual and reproductive health is a fundamental aspect of this right.” 
This Principle details seven aspects of state obligations related to this right as mentioned below:
1. The duty to take legislative and other measures to ensure the right to health and access to healthcare.
2. The treatment of medical records with confidentiality.
3. The design and development of healthcare resources and programs to improve the health status of LGBTI people and address discrimination and prejudice.
4. The need for informed and empowered decisions regarding medical treatment and care.
5. Non-discrimination and respect for the diversity of sexual orientations and gender identities in sexual health, education, prevention, care, and treatment.
6. Facilitating access to gender reassignment treatments and 
7. Adopting policy-making and education and training programs for healthcare workers to improve treatment for LGBTI people.
 
Principle 18, which addresses the need for LGBTI persons to be protected from medical abuses, states:
“No person may be forced to undergo any form of medical or psychological treatment, procedure, testing, or be confined to a medical facility, based on sexual orientation or gender equality. Notwithstanding any classifications to the contrary, a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity are not medical conditions and are not to be treated, cured, or suppressed.” 
Four obligations for states of Principle 18 are as follow:
1. Taking the necessary legislative and other measures to ensure protection against harmful medical practices, including the irreversible alteration of a child’s body through attempts to impose a gender identity.
2. Establishing child protection mechanisms to reduce the risk of medical abuse. 
3. Ensuring LGBTI people are not used to unethically or involuntarily test medical procedures or conduct research, and reversing funding programs that would enable such abuses and 
4. Ensuring medical and psychological treatment does not treat sexual orientation and gender identity as a pathology.
 
These provisions in the Yogyakarta Principles provide guidance on how international human rights law can be applied in the specific context of respecting, protecting and promoting the right to health for LGBTI persons. 
 Health Challenges 
They can’t talk to doctors about who they have sex with, they won’t get the information they need. 
Providers don’t necessarily know the sexual orientation of their patients. 
This can prevent them from asking certain questions, probing for certain risk behaviors. 
Another potential barrier to health care is “coming out.
How violation of Human rights of LGBTQ takes place:
A psychiatrist provides “treatment” to an LGBTI person with electric shock or hormone therapy without consent. 
Health benefits and insurances are not made available to LGBTI individuals, because of their sexual orientation
or gender identity, including funds for body modifications. LGBTI communities are denied access to services to 
prevent HIV. Young people are denied information about HIV and AIDS, safer sex, and condoms, as well as about 
sexual behaviors such as homosexuality.
Failure of Health System and its cause:
A national health system fails to provide anti-retroviral treatment to LGBTI people while making it 
accessible to others. Perceived LGBTI persons are treated with stigma and judgmental attitudes in the health 
system and therefore are not providing equal levels of health. LGBTI individuals do not feel comfortable 
accessing health care facilities. Men who have sex with men (MSM) are regularly left out of national health 
and budget plans, thereby ensuring that services are not funded and available. No information in the school 
curriculum about LGBTI health/sexual health education for future protection against sexually transmitted 
illnesses such as HIV and AIDS. Sexual education should be broadened to include specific information about 
the health of LGBTI persons. Secondary schooling does not provide information on LGBTI health issues. LGBTI 
youth are not exposed to crucial information about their health, which is necessary as a tool for their future 
growth and health. The failure to protect health rights for LGBTI people is as much a failure of human rights 
practitioners and the human rights system, as it is a failure of health practitioners and health systems 
because Even as human rights law has developed, it has continued to marginalize LGBTI people and it has 
failed to adequately integrate the rights of LGBTI people.
LGBTQ Health Education:
Provide LGBTI health education is an important aspect of the right to health for LGBTI individuals in many 
countries, educational materials that address sexual orientation or gender identity issues, or even acknowledge 
the existence of LGBTI concerns, are banned from schools. In many countries around the world, the hetero-norm 
is reinforced through withholding education about sexual and gender diversity, and risking the health of young 
LGBTI people in the process.
